---
title: 'more musings on being a conservative'
---

What does it mean to be a conservative, culturally, spritually, or theologically? (I leave aside
completely and intentionally the question of classifying political conservatism today).

Growing up, I was taught that conservatism was an arrangement of oneself with respect to the past, a
recognition that the past's collective wisdom was larger than any single present's wisdom, the
belief that the best way forward was to perpetutate what we had been taught by our ancestors, at
least insofar as it was righteous.

If I was taught that conservatism was a perspective of appreciation towards the past, as I've grown
older, it seems that conservatism is rather a state of war towards the present. And not merely a
state of war, but a rejection of peace, when offered. Peace is compromise, apostasy. Conservatism
seems to be, rather than a love of the past, a statement of monocausal narratives for why the
present is so bad. For example, Richard Weaver blaming western civilization's downfall from an
assumed 10-11th century peak on nominalism. Or Francis Schaffer's analysis that western civilization
is a slow train wreck stemming from Thomas Aquinas' supposed separation of nature and grace, of the
fall of man's mind and his soul. Equipped with a narrative for why western civilization has been on
an inevitable downhill path since basically the dawn of time, the conservative's task becomes to
identifiy these monocausal liberalizing tendencies in the modern world, and to blame everything on
them.

Abortion? Damn nominalists at it again.

To some degree I jest, but I can't help but feel that there's a measure of truth to my frustration.
Today many conservatives reject other Christians who are concerned with racial or economic justice
as being "compromised," but it's unclear what exactly they've compromised on. Economic or racial
_injustice_ has certainly never been a conservative value. Perhaps a cynic would disagree with me
here and say that they are, but I trust the good faith of my fellow Christians that they are not. So
what exactly is being compromised? On Twitter, for example, I've seen a lot people saying that David
French is "compromised," but he hasn't compromised on any specific doctrinal issue. From what I can
tell, the main source of his "compromise" seems to be his belief that the identification of Trump's
secular right with evangelicalism is a greater danger to the Church than the "left." Whether or not
you agree with French, you must admit that the definition of "compromise" as the abandonment of, or
even lack of focus on, a particular downfall narrative is sloppy at best.
