---
title: 'the dangerous game of causality'
pubDate: 'Jan 6 2022'
---

While reading D. B. Hart’s essay “The Origin of the Specious,” I came across this sentence, which
captures well the dangers of oversimplification: “when one begins to touch upon matters of a more
abstract frame or of a more cosmic scope—say, God, the history of religion, the nature of morality,
social evolution, historical determinism, ultimate purpose, and so on—then it is often the case that
the only valuable answers will prove no less complex and daunting than the questions that have
prompted them. At that point the journalist’s otherwise commendable passion to establish ‘the real
story’ becomes more a hindrance than an aid to understanding.”

Intellectual and cultural conservatives, and I count myself one of them, love to speculate about
causation. We stand in a tradition of pontification about how one idea led to another, and then
another, and before you know it, Robespierre was chopping off people’s heads. In the classical
education of my youth, figures like Francis Schaeffer and Richard Weaver drew long shadows over the
study of art and philosophy. Behind a great deal of study lay the scarcely concealed ambition to
_discover where it all went awry._ I must confess, in my nostalgia for the umbrageous ruins of a
noble civilization now heaped with the opprobriums of modernity, that I feel a great deal of
sympathy for this sort of thing. And yet it is also my duty to reflect on the epistemological ills
to which this this perception of the past is liable.

In Plato’s famous “allegory of the cave”, he describes slaves chained, gazing for a lifetime at the
wall opposite them in the eponymous cavern; a wall illumined by flickering firelight, and
interrupted only by the shadows cast by those moving behind them. In such a world, they imagine that
the shadows are identical with their corporeal causes, and when one among them is dragged forcibly
out into the sunlight, treat him and his mad reports of physical reality with contempt, and even
seek to kill him, upon his return.

This parable has proven apropos to nearly every conceivable narrative of intellectual or spiritual
_photisis_, and it proves applicable to our topic of over-simplifying causation as well. A facile
defense of the “discovery of original sin” style of intellectual history is that, while of course it
is not meant to explain the _entirety_ of the story, it nevertheless stands as a “simplification of
the truth, but the truth nonetheless.” On the contrary, the shadows in the cave are not merely an
“oversimplification of reality,” they are a lie, and to remain esconced comfortably among them is
positively inimical to the discovery of truth. As Plato says, regarding the pity that the free man
now feels towards his previous compatriots, “Would he not say with Homer, ‘Better to be the poor
servant of a poor master, and to endure anything, rather than think as they do and live after their
manner?’” Better to be blind, than to think the shadows truth: they are a perversion of reality,
despite their origin in the light. Causation by the truth does not imply the inherence of the truth
in the thing caused.

For our purposes, the shadows in the cave are the ‘just-so’ stories that we tell ourselves about the
past, and particularly about the causation of historical events and movements by ideas. In the
telling of such stories, twin dangers appear; a Scylla and Charybdis, if you will. Firstly, the
greater the explanatory power of the “real story” that we seek to get at (for example, Weaver’s
attribution to nominalism all the evils of the modern west), the more likely it is to be in error,
because of the simple complexity of causation. Any diligent student of history will understand the
futility of monocausal explanations, and will note the lack of epistemological self-reflection
required to seek for them. Secondly, as conservatives, a great deal of our eagerness to explain the
causes for our age lies in the desire to pass judgment on it. Passing judgment through the assertion
of purported causation is simply the genetic fallacy in its most classical form.

I must clarify that I am not here attempting to censure the passing of judgment in itself, nor am I
condemning the historian’s urge to trace from one point to another the various causes of events for
the edification of posterity. Livy and his famous preface may sleep easily. What I decry is the
justification of over-simplified, or ‘monocausal’ metanarratives on the basis that
over-simplification is not the same thing as error. Such metanarratives lead their advocates on a
futile witch-hunt against anything which might be influenced by what they believe to have identified
as the original intellectual sin. Perhaps a person has fallen prey to the belief that Augustine
introduced Greek philosphy to the Church, and in so doing plunged Christianity down a slippery slope
which could only lead to the secularism of the modern west. Besides the ghastly ignorance of
philosophical history which such a view betrays, it leads those infected by it, when presented by a
new idea for their understanding and evaluation, to carefully attempt to discern whether the idea
evinces any similarity to or causation by ‘Greek philosophy’ (however this is defined), and to
embrace or dismiss it on these asinine grounds, rather than on its own terms. I could repeat this
example with any number of metanarratives, some more and less coherent, and the structure of my
objection would be the same, and the greater the explanatory power of the metanarrative, the worse
the effects become.

Before I conclude this short exercise in disapproval, I think that some speculation would not be
inappropriate as to why we conservatives fall prey so easily to this variety of intellectual
laziness. We hope to find in the past, with Livy, noble things to emulate, and “evil things, rotten
through and through, to avoid.” This is entirely healthy. But, like Hart’s journalists, we are
anxious to come upon “the real story,” that illusive yet puissant puzzle piece that will satiate our
hunger for a straightforward explanation, and provide an easy rubric for judgment. The feeling of
vindication by the past over one’s intellectual foes is satisfying, as I know from personal
experience. Yet we conservatives also have a penchant for talking about “the higher things,” —grand
aspirations as to what one might find in the light outside our flickering grotto, and a breathtaking
optimism as to our ability to ascend to those dazzling heights—which is to say, those things which
are above all least capable of simple explanation. The more complex and beautiful the idea, the
sharper and more deadly the blade of explanation becomes, and thus in our human aptitude for the
genetic fallacy, we are liable to meet a tragic end.

_Postscript: In the prose above, I at various places absuse the English language to a degree perhaps
galling to the reader, but of great amusement to myself. May those of an editorial mind forgive my
linguistic mirth, and be satisfied that I know this already, and do not require help in discerning,
for example, the phrase “puissant puzzle piece” to be less than the_ mot juste.
